Ilariae/relaying (#628)
wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs: protocol/infrastructure/relayer.md

# Relayers

This page provides a comprehensive guide to relayers within the Wormhole network, describing their role, types, and benefits in facilitating multichain processes.

> Relaying refers to the process of delivering a cross-chain message, specifically a [Verified Action Approval (VAA)](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/vaas/){target=\_blank}, from its source chain to the destination chain. In a multichain application, after a message is emitted on the source chain and signed by Wormhole’s Guardians, it needs to be carried over to the target chain’s contract – this is the relayer's job. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relaying refers to the process of delivering a cross-chain message, specifically a [Verified Action Approval (VAA)](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/vaas/){target=\_blank}, from its source chain to the destination chain. In a multichain application, after a message is emitted on the source chain and signed by Wormhole’s Guardians, it must be carried over to the target chain’s contract – this is the relayer's responsibility. 
```

> Relayers do not need to be trusted, the security of Wormhole messages stems from the Guardian Network signatures on the VAA, which cannot be tampered with by relayers. In other words, a relayer cannot alter the content or outcome of a message – it can only affect when the message gets delivered (availability). This trust-minimized design means developers and users don’t have to trust a relayer service to preserve integrity, only to be online to forward the message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relayers do not need to be trusted; the security of Wormhole messages stems from the Guardian Network signatures on the VAA, which cannot be tampered with by relayers. In other words, a relayer cannot alter the content or outcome of a message – it can only affect when the message gets delivered (availability). This trust-minimized design means developers and users don’t have to trust a relayer service to preserve integrity, only to be online to forward the message.
```

## Fundamentals

This section highlights the crucial principles underpinning the operation and handling of relayers within the Wormhole network.

Relayers are fundamentally trustless entities within the network, meaning while they don't require your trust to operate, you also shouldn't trust them implicitly. They function as delivery mechanisms, transporting VAAs from their source to their destination.

> - **Anyone can relay a message**: Guardians broadcast signed VAAs publicly, so any entity can retrieve a VAA and submit it to the destination chain’s contracts. The signatures provide universal verifiability, any Wormhole contract or client can check the Guardian signatures. These properties ensure that relaying can be permissionless and trustless. If one relayer is down, any other party (even the user) could take the VAA and deliver it. No relayer can forge or modify the message without invalidating the signatures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Anyone can relay a message**: Guardians broadcast signed VAAs publicly, so any entity can retrieve a VAA and submit it to the destination chain’s contracts. The signatures provide universal verifiability; any Wormhole contract or client can check the Guardian signatures. These properties ensure that relaying can be permissionless and trustless. If one relayer is down, any other party (even the user) could take the VAA and deliver it. No relayer can forge or modify the message without invalidating the signatures.
```

- **Security is in the VAA**: The Wormhole Guardians’ signatures authenticate the message. A relayer might provide additional info or off-chain data, but contracts should not rely on anything that isn’t from a verified VAA or on-chain source. This ensures that even though relayers operate off-chain, they cannot compromise the application’s logic or funds. In summary, Wormhole relayers can’t compromise security, only availability – if a relayer misbehaves, the worst outcome is a delayed or missed delivery, not a falsified message.
- **User experience vs. infrastructure**: Relayers exist to improve user experience by automating cross-chain steps that would otherwise be manual. However, using relayers introduces considerations around fees and infrastructure. Developers must either rely on an external relayer service or run their own. Wormhole’s design offers flexibility: developers can choose an entirely client-side (no relayer) approach or opt for either Wormhole-provided relayer networks or custom relayers that developers build themselves. Each approach has its benefits and trade-offs in terms of complexity, cost, and control, as we explore next.

## Manual vs. Automated Relaying

> When integrating Wormhole messaging, developers face a choice between manual (client-side) relaying and automated relaying. The distinction lies in the entity responsible for delivering the VAA to the target chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When integrating Wormhole messaging, developers must choose between manual (client-side) relaying and automated relaying. The distinction lies in the entity responsible for delivering the VAA to the target chain.
```

> - **Manual Relaying (Client-Side)**: This approach puts the burden on the user or their client (e.g., a dApp or wallet) to carry out all cross-chain steps. After an action on chain A produces a VAA, the user must manually fetch that VAA (typically via a Wormhole API or explorer) and then submit it in a transaction on chain B. No specialized backend is needed. The relayer role is handled directly by the user via their wallet or web browser. The advantage is simplicity in architecture (no extra services to run) and no additional fees beyond the target chain’s transaction fees. However, this approach provides a limited user experience beyond basic demos, as it requires users to sign multiple transactions and maintain funds on each chain involved. This process can be cumbersome and error-prone, as the additional step may be unclear and lead to drop-offs. In summary, manual relaying is suitable for testing and MVPs, but it's not ideal for production-grade applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Manual relaying (client-side)**: This approach puts the burden on the user or their client (e.g., a dApp or wallet) to carry out all cross-chain steps. After an action on chain A produces a VAA, the user must manually fetch that VAA (typically via a Wormhole API or explorer) and then submit it in a transaction on chain B. No specialized backend is needed. The relayer role is handled directly by the user via their wallet or web browser. The advantage lies in the simplicity of architecture (no extra services to run) and no additional fees beyond the target chain’s transaction fees. However, this approach provides a limited user experience beyond basic demos, as it requires users to sign multiple transactions and maintain funds on each chain involved. This process can be cumbersome and error-prone, as the additional step may be unclear and lead to drop-offs. In summary, manual relaying is suitable for testing and MVPs, but it's not ideal for production-grade applications.
```

> - **Automated Relaying**: In this approach, the cross-chain delivery is handled automatically by a relayer service or network, rather than the end-user. From the user’s perspective, the message is delivered to the target chain without requiring manual intervention. Automated relaying significantly improves the user experience by allowing an asset transfer to be initiated with a single action, after which the funds are delivered to the destination chain. There are two ways to achieve automated relaying:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Automated relaying**: In this approach, the cross-chain delivery is handled automatically by a relayer service or network, rather than the end-user. From the user’s perspective, the message is delivered to the target chain without requiring manual intervention. Automated relaying significantly improves the user experience by allowing an asset transfer to be initiated with a single action, after which the funds are delivered to the destination chain. There are two ways to achieve automated relaying:
```

| Aspect               | Manual Relaying (Client-Side)                               | Automated Relaying                                     |
|----------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| VAA Delivery         | User or client application                                  | Relayer service or network (custom or Wormhole)        |
| Infrastructure       | None required                                               | Either a backend service or Wormhole’s relayer network |
| User Experience      | Multiple signatures, funds on each chain, extra manual step | One-click transfers, message delivered automatically   |
| Cost Model           | Only target chain transaction fees                          | Service fees + destination chain gas                   |
| Reliability          | Depends on user completing all steps                        | Relayer handles retries and execution                  |
| Best Suited For      | Testing, MVPs, demos                                        | Production-grade applications prioritizing UX          |

## Wormhole Relayers

> To simplify the adoption of automated relaying, Wormhole provides its relayer infrastructure and APIs for developers. Wormhole Relayers is an umbrella term for Wormhole’s suite of relayer solutions, which currently includes the [messaging executor framework](#executor) and the [standard relayer](#standard-relayer) (currently being phased out), as well as the option of building [custom relayers](#custom-relaying) using Wormhole’s tooling. All of these approaches adhere to Wormhole’s core principle of trustless delivery – not trusting the Wormhole relayer operators any more than any blockchain infrastructure. Below is an overview of each option and its role in cross-chain dApp development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To simplify the adoption of automated relaying, Wormhole provides its relayer infrastructure and APIs for developers to utilize. Wormhole Relayers is an umbrella term for Wormhole’s suite of relayer solutions, which currently includes the [messaging executor framework](#executor) and the [standard relayer](#standard-relayer) (currently being phased out), as well as the option of building [custom relayers](#custom-relaying) using Wormhole’s tooling. All of these approaches adhere to Wormhole’s core principle of trustless delivery – not trusting the Wormhole relayer operators any more than any blockchain infrastructure. Below is an overview of each option and its role in cross-chain dApp development.
```

| Aspect              | **Executor**                                     | **Standard Relayer**                | **Custom Relayer**           |
|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------|
| **Who Runs It**     | Permissionless network of providers              | Wormhole contributor–run nodes      | Application team             |
| **Chain Support**   | Multichain, including non-EVM                    | EVM only                            | Any Wormhole-supported chain |
| **Integration**     | Executor contracts with request–quote model      | On-chain functions                  | Custom backend service       |
| **Infrastructure**  | None (on-chain only)                             | None (on-chain only)                | Full backend required, 24/7 availability |
| **User Experience** | Seamless, broader chain support                  | Seamless, EVM only                  | App-specific optimizations possible |

> | **Trade-offs**      | Early rollout, limited initial availability      | EVM-only, no off-chain logic        | High DevOps cost, must stay secure |

Reviewer: Can you please remove all the bold from this table?

### Executor

> The Executor is Wormhole’s next-generation cross-chain execution framework, designed to extend relaying functionality beyond EVM chains and add greater flexibility to how deliveries happen. The Executor system enables anyone to act as a relayer (often referred to as an execution provider) in a permissionless network, and it introduces a request-and-quote model for delivering messages. The Executor architecture still relies on the core Wormhole guarantees (VAAs for security, Guardian verification), but it changes how the relaying service is accessed and who can fulfill it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Executor is Wormhole’s next-generation cross-chain execution framework, designed to extend relaying functionality beyond EVM chains and add greater flexibility to how deliveries are processed. The Executor system enables anyone to act as a relayer (often referred to as an execution provider) in a permissionless network, introducing a request-and-quote model for delivering messages. The Executor architecture still relies on the core Wormhole guarantees (VAAs for security, Guardian verification), but it changes how the relaying service is accessed and who can fulfill it.
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant App as Application
    participant ExContract as Executor Contract (Source Chain)
    participant ExecNode as Executor Node (Off-chain)
    participant Dest as Target Contract (Destination Chain)

    App->>ExContract: Submit Execution Request<br/>(target chain, target address, fee quote)
    ExContract->>ExecNode: Emit event with request + escrowed fee
    ExecNode-->>ExecNode: Listen for events<br/>Match signed quote
    ExecNode->>Dest: Deliver VAA + execute message payload
    Dest-->>App: Target contract logic executed
```

> For developers, integrating the Executor framework can be as straightforward as using the standard relayer, with the added benefit that it can support non-EVM chains and custom pricing logic. It’s described as _a permissionless, extensible, and low-overhead cross-chain execution framework_. The extensibility means the system is built to accommodate various message types and future features, and permissionless means integrators are not tied to a single provider – it is possible to run an executor node if desired, or rely on community-run services. The Executor is part of Wormhole’s effort to make relaying truly multichain: for example, delivering messages to Solana or other ecosystems where an EVM-style relayer contract is insufficient will be possible through this framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For developers, integrating the Executor framework can be as straightforward as using the standard relayer, with the added benefit of supporting non-EVM chains and custom pricing logic. It’s described as _a permissionless, extensible, and low-overhead cross-chain execution framework_. The extensibility means the system is built to accommodate various message types and future features, and permissionless means integrators are not tied to a single provider – it is possible to run an executor node if desired, or rely on community-run services. The Executor is part of Wormhole’s effort to make relaying truly multichain. For example, delivering messages to Solana or other ecosystems where an EVM-style relayer contract is insufficient will be possible through this framework.
```

The Messaging Executor is a recent addition, and its availability might initially be limited to specific chains as it rolls out. It works alongside the Wormhole core messaging contract, complementing the existing relayer system. As the Executor network grows, developers get the advantage of broader chain support without having to custom-build their relayers for those environments. Just like the standard relayer, the Executor remains trust-minimized – an execution provider cannot violate the security of the message, and their signed quote simply helps ensure they are paid for the service.

> For more technical details, see the [open-source example executor implementation](https://github.com/wormholelabs-xyz/example-messaging-executor){target=\_blank}. It covers how quotes, requests, and the off-chain API work in the Executor system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more technical details, see the [open-source example Executor implementation](https://github.com/wormholelabs-xyz/example-messaging-executor){target=\_blank}. It explains how quotes, requests, and the off-chain API function within the Executor system.
```

### Standard Relayer

> The standard relayer refers to the Wormhole-operated relayer network available out of the box for EVM chains. This decentralized network of relayer nodes, run by Wormhole Contributors, automatically picks up eligible messages and delivers them to the destination chain. Importantly, integrators do not need to operate any backend infrastructure: interaction happens entirely through on-chain contracts. On the source chain, a contract calls the Wormhole relayer contract’s send function (e.g., [`sendPayloadToEvm`](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole/blob/a194cd1445460363843d5e72517f585552c83699/relayer/ethereum/contracts/interfaces/relayer/IWormholeRelayer.sol#L86){target=\_blank}) to request delivery, specifying the target chain and paying the associated fee. Then the relayer network transports the VAA and calls the target contract on the destination chain to pass along the message data. The target contract must implement a standard interface (such as [`IWormholeReceiver`](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole/blob/a194cd1445460363843d5e72517f585552c83699/relayer/ethereum/contracts/interfaces/relayer/IWormholeReceiver.sol#L8){target=\_blank}) to handle the incoming message.

Reviewer: Links shouldn't be anchored to a specific commit. They should be anchored to a release.

Using the standard relayer provides two main benefits: ease of integration and no infrastructure to maintain. Developers do not need to run servers or monitor the Guardian network; everything is handled by the relayer service. This lowers operational costs and complexity for cross-chain messaging. Sending a cross-chain message becomes almost as simple as emitting an event or calling a function, and receiving it is comparable to handling a callback. Because relayers cannot alter VAAs, the security model remains trust-minimized: Wormhole’s Guardian signatures provide full verification, and the relayer only affects availability.

**Trade-offs**

> The standard relayer favors simplicity over flexibility. All computation must happen on-chain, as the relayer performs no off-chain logic. As a result, advanced workflows - like complex conditional logic, multi-step workflows, or gas-intensive computations - cannot be off-loaded. Additionally, the Wormhole relayer network currently supports only EVM-compatible blockchains. Non-EVM chains (Solana, Sui, etc.) aren’t covered by the standard relayer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The standard relayer favors simplicity over flexibility. All computation must happen on-chain, as the relayer performs no off-chain logic. As a result, advanced workflows - like complex conditional logic, multi-step workflows, or gas-intensive computations - cannot be offloaded. Additionally, the Wormhole relayer network currently supports only EVM-compatible blockchains. Non-EVM chains (Solana, Sui, etc.) aren’t covered by the standard relayer.
```

!!!note
    Wormhole provides other relaying options for specific use cases, such as Native Token Transfers (NTT).

> Use of the standard relayer involves a fee that covers the target chain’s gas plus a small service fee. Fees are paid when calling the send function on the source chain, and are distributed to relayer providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the standard relayer involves a fee that covers the target chain’s gas costs plus a small service fee. Fees are paid when calling the send function on the source chain and are distributed to relayer providers.
```

### Custom Relayer

For projects with special requirements or the need for complete control, custom relaying is an option. This involves building and running a relayer service tailored to the application. A custom relayer typically runs as a backend service that listens for specific VAAs from the Wormhole network (often via a [Spy](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/spy/){target=\_blank}) and then submits transactions to the destination chain when relevant messages are observed. Because Wormhole VAAs are public and trustless, anyone can run a relayer — an integrator could even operate a private relayer that only handles their own protocol’s messages.

The primary motivation for choosing this route is flexibility and optimization; another reason may be specific chains where a Wormhole relayer is still not available. With an off-chain component, developers can:  

> - Apply conditional logic like aggregating multiple messages and relay them in a single transaction (batching).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Apply conditional logic like aggregating multiple messages and relaying them in a single transaction (batching).  
```

- Trigger delivery logic (e.g., timing, price feeds, external signals) before delivery.  
- Perform computations off-chain to reduce on-chain gas costs.  
- Design custom incentive structures (e.g., funded by a protocol treasury or user-paid fees).  
- Enhance the user experience with optimizations specific to an app.

**Trade-offs**

> Running a custom relayer comes with significant overhead. The service must be available 24/7, requiring infrastructure (servers or cloud functions) and ongoing DevOps. Development is also more complex, as integrators must handle Wormhole messages securely, avoid introducing trust assumptions (contracts must always verify VAAs), and potentially manage cross-chain fee payments. In short, custom relayers increase flexibility at the cost of additional responsibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running a custom relayer comes with significant overhead. The service must be available 24/7, requiring infrastructure (such as servers or cloud functions) and ongoing DevOps support. Development is also more complex, as integrators must handle Wormhole messages securely, avoid introducing trust assumptions (contracts must always verify VAAs), and potentially manage cross-chain fee payments. In short, custom relayers increase flexibility at the cost of additional responsibility.
```

To simplify the adoption of automated relaying, Wormhole provides its relayer infrastructure and APIs for developers to utilize. Wormhole Relayers is an umbrella term for Wormhole’s suite of relayer solutions, which currently includes the [messaging executor framework](#executor) and the [standard relayer](#standard-relayer) (currently being phased out), as well as the option of building [custom relayers](#custom-relaying) using Wormhole’s tooling. All of these approaches adhere to Wormhole’s core principle of trustless delivery – not trusting the Wormhole relayer operators any more than any blockchain infrastructure. Below is an overview of each option and its role in cross-chain dApp development.

Wormhole currently supports three types of relayers:  

- **Executor**: A permissionless, next-generation framework that enables anyone to act as a relayer, with support for multichain delivery and custom pricing through a request–quote model.  

> - **Standard Relayer**: A Wormhole-operated network available out of the box for EVM chains, providing simple integration without backend infrastructure.  
> - **Custom Relayer**: An application-run service tailored to specific needs, offering maximum flexibility and optimization at the cost of higher operational overhead.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Standard relayer**: A Wormhole-operated network available out of the box for EVM chains, providing simple integration without backend infrastructure.  
- **Custom relayer**: An application-run service tailored to specific needs, offering maximum flexibility and optimization at the cost of higher operational overhead.  
```
